hello everyone and welcome to this mini
introduction into element 3D where I'll
be showing you most of its features and
how to use them it might be over a
decade old plug-in without too many
updates in the last couple of years but
nonetheless a powerful tool which I
still used to this day in every other
project this is mostly made for
beginners but I'm sure anyone could find
a couple of good tips and tricks along
the way let's get started so I've got my
element 3D layer here which is just a
black solid with the effect on it and a
black background let me just create a
camera as well for later just so we have
it and we'll go into the scene setup now
element 3D is not made for 3D modeling
you do have the basic shapes here for
example you can create a cube and then
scale it up in XYZ here adjust the
segments you even got the chamfer option
here but it's not made for advanced 3D
modeling and so on this feature is
available in every 3D software so I
guess they've added as well you can kind
of use this to create let's say some
sort of Icon or maybe just a wall for
your scene and so on what you mainly
want to do with element is importing
text logos or any kind of 3D model so if
we go into file here under import we've
got 3D object and 3D sequence now I do
have a separate tutorial on the sequence
part if you want to import some 3D
animated objects you can do that as well
but you also got the big import button
here if you just want to import some
sort of model now let's say you've got
this cool looking abstract from sketch
Fab but sadly it's only available in an
fbx format or jlb element can only read
obj element 3D files and Cinema 4D so
once you've downloaded this model you
would need to convert it so I am using
blender here which is a free software
and it's something I recommend just
having in case you want to convert files
so you basically import it into blender
then you will go into export and Export
it as an obj file on here so once you've
converted the model you can go ahead and
click on import find the location select
your model and then
open let me hide the box here and okay
this is great because sometimes the
model is too small or too big for your
scene so what do you do obviously you
can go into the transform here and scale
it up and let me just drop a bright
texture so we can actually see it okay
so we can scale it up here and you can
see that we're going to a th000 and it's
still rather small so instead of doing
this you can just select normalized size
and it will adjust the size of it to
your scene so this is just a basic
feature you want to keep in mind when
importing different objects into element
now you've got basic transform settings
here auxiliary channels which we'll get
into in a bit UV mapping we'll get to
all of these in just a bit I do want to
get into the groups here and tell you
what are the different types of groups
so you can see that we have group folder
here and it's set to group number one
let me go ahead and create a floor so
something I kind of get used to is using
free hot keys so we've got R to bring up
the scale properties e for the rotation
and W for the transform so let me go
ahead and click R make sure our three
are highlighted and I can just drag it
here and scale up my floor now let's say
I wanted to be a separate layer for my
3D model so two things I can do I can
drag it out here and then I can see it
has its own number set it to number two
and hit okay now here we've got these
five groups which we can control
individually so let's say we go into
group number two I can drag my floor
down and then I can go into group number
one and animate my object individually
as well we can also do a new group so
for example we've got this folder icon
and we've got the group folder I can set
it to group number two import my floor
and then import I don't know different
kinds of objects into this specific
group and animate it individually now
just a couple of more things for the
interface what we have here is the
presets which you have your preset
textures which we'll get into and you
also got the model browser which you
have a starter pack which element comes
with and there are also a bunch of free
packs available such as these ones and
it's basically just models which you can
just import with a click here and you
got it set up for animation with the
textures already so this is just a quick
review of the basics in element let's go
over importing text and logos into
element so I've got my basic 2D text
here created in After Effects I can
modify this however I want to in terms
of font size and so on then I've go to
element here and under costume layers
I've got something called costume text
and mask and I can simply select it
under one of these layers here so path
number one will be my text let me go
ahead and hide this layer and we'll go
into element now here I'll simply click
on extrude and I can see my text in 3D
just like that so what I can do here is
some basic Extrusion options so we've
got the extrude which is basically how
far it goes we've got the edges and I'm
not going to get too in depth about
these but you can basically play around
with these settings to create your sort
of text with a bevel style and so on
now let's say I want to import multiple
text or a different layer so I can
duplicate this let me name this one text
number
two and I'll go into the path layer
number two here and select my second
text then I'll go into here and I can
either click on extrude again to create
a new text layer and I'll go here and
select path number two and I can see it
right here with my other path number one
now let's say I have this logo here and
I want to make it 3D so I'll do the same
thing using mask now I'll go into layer
Auto Trace select Alpha since my layer
is transparent and hit on
okay then we'll go into
element select it under path here layer
number three then I can select extrude
again I'll select path number three and
I've got a 3D Extrusion of that model
now what if I want to maintain the
texture from the 2D image onto this 3D
image so what we need to do here is
precompose this layer make sure it fits
with a non comp move all
attributes and now we'll select layer
autot trace it again I can disable the
blur here and hit on okay so we'
basically done the same thing but our
composition size is the same as our main
comp so now if I go into element I still
have it set to layer three here I can go
into costume texture Maps so I'm
selecting the same layer here and here
let's go back into the scene setup and
under the texture of this model I will
click on diffuse and I'll select my
costume layer one now this will look
pretty weird like this but a quick fix
is clicking on use layer as UV and now
I've got my 2D image basically
projecting onto this Extrusion now let's
say I want to add like a cool golden
type of edge here I can go into my
Extrusion model here under bevel copies
I will set it to two so now I have two
copies of the same and I can expand the
edge
here extrude it down a
bit and move it into Z
offset then I'll go into my presets
physical and let's say we want it to be
golden we'll drop this here and now
we've got this golden type of edge
around our 3D logo
and we can start animating it and if you
go to your bevel presets here you do
have a lot of presets you can use mostly
for text but I also use some of these
for Logos but if we double click them
you can see we've got some interesting
bevels here and this works with flat
logos or some text if you need some
texture on the logo just like we did
here then we basically need to reset one
of these layers and then import the
image particle replicator and basic
animation so if you go into particle
replicator here we obviously got the
basic transform settings such as
position rotation and we can animate
them using key frames now we've also got
something called particle replicator now
this is used to create some pretty cool
Motion Graphics usually with different
models so for example if I set this to
sphere let me set the count to 20 and
now I got 20 cubes in a spherical kind
of shape I can go into scale shape here
and scale up the shape of the sphere and
and I can also go into particle look
here and bring down the size of my
particle itself so basically each one of
these cubes is now a particle and under
these settings we control them
individually so for example rotation
random here we can randomly rotate each
of these particles and we can also set a
random size and so on and there are also
all kinds of shapes here like a ring for
example and we can play around with
these as well now we also got scatter
which is basically to spread out the
particles this is good for creating just
like a if we set this to grid and we
want to just scatter some pieces in 3D
space and I'll give them some random
rotation just to fill in some depth then
we can do this so that is your particle
replicator now we've also got something
under particle look which is called
multiobject now this is what I usually
use to animate particles or
pre-fractured objects and if we enable
this H we can play around with the
settings but nothing really is going to
happen but for example if we go into our
scene setup here in our starter pack
we've got something called floor
fracture or B fracture let's import
that I'm just going to scale that up a
bit so now if you go into the
multiobject settings and select the
random rotation you you can see that
each one of these is rotating randomly
based on these settings so we can
displace them rotate them and Scatter
and so on so similar to before we just
have one 3D model with a bunch of small
pieces and we can randomly animate them
using these settings so again similar to
the particle look we created a bunch of
particles and we can animate them using
these settings now since this model
includes a lot of models within one we
can animate it using the multiobject
hopefully that kind of puts it into
perspective and doesn't confuse you too
much we've also got a great feature
that's called deform and basically
allows us to create all sorts of
deformations of a model or text so if we
go into the particle look here we've got
something called the form and we can
enable it then let's say we want to
twist it so we'll enable the Twist and
we can twist it in the Y dire Direction
but we do have some issues with the
polygons being too low so if I want this
to be smoother what I'm going to have to
do is go back into element and since we
are using a text here I can switch to
the wireframe view and you can see that
we don't have a lot of detail on our
model so to fix this we'll go down into
surface options and we've got something
called subdivision level so we can bump
this up to maybe fre and this gives us a
lot more detail to work with and if we
switch back to shaded now and go back
here try to twist it you can see that we
get a lot more detail and it's much
smoother on the edges so we can also use
this for animations for example I've got
this leather AES coming in spinning so
if I bring up the key frames here I can
set a key frame for my y twist and let's
say we want to do about 90° let's match
the graph here with everything so I'll
just select them and match everything to
be the same speed and now we've got it
coming in with like a Twist which adds
to our animation and we can utilize this
in many other ways there's also bending
which you can just bend the object in
different directions and there's also
noise now noise is great for creating
some details like an ocean or if you
just want a plane to have some sort of
detail so for example if we go ahead and
create a plane
here let's hide our text here and I'll
just scale this up switch back to my
wireframe mode now since we are using a
plane we can actually increase the
segments here so set this to be 50 by 50
and that gives us a lot more detail to
work with let's switch back hit
okay and let me show you what I mean and
let's enable the noise here so if we
give it a slight angle here and increase
the noise you can see that our shape is
basically deformed and we can animate
this to be sort of like an ocean wave so
deforming can be great for animation as
well as just giving something a bit more
detail now let's go over some textures
so how do we use them how do we import
them and so on so if we go into the
physical folder here element got a
couple of presets we can use so if I
select Chrome for example let me double
click it you can see that our cube is
now reflective and has this chrome type
of finish now we do see some sort of an
image inside and that is our environment
map so if we go here
and select this thing it will usually
take you to this folder and these images
come within your element 3D and it's
basically what's it's going to reflect
so let's select one of these hit okay
and now we can see a different image
within this texture we can go down here
select how reflective we want it to be
and how glossy and so on so these are
settings you play with when you animate
your scene and so on now what if I want
to import like a metal or brick type of
texture onto this 3D model so there's
actually a great website called poly
Haven where you've got this cool 3D
textures you've also got some models and
environment maps and this is all
completely for free now how do we import
them so let me go ahead and right click
here and hit reset and that resets our
texture and we can go ahead into the
texture tab here and select the fuse and
we'll import the diffuse from the
texture that we've got so this is the
texture I've got from poly heaven and
I'm going to select the one that's
called the fuse so this is our base
color and we have a display on this
Cube okay so it does look pretty flat we
can see some Reflections but again it is
flat so what we can do to enhance this
we can use the normal and bum map now if
you're completely new to 3D this might
sound kind of weird to you but basically
a normal map is something that looks
like this usually it's either called
normal or bump and it basically fakes
the Extrusion of a model so if we go
down to the side here you can see it's
kind of flat but if we increase the bump
we can sort of see these edges so this
is something that I pretty much always
use especially in close-ups to give the
model some more details now there's
obviously things like closeness
reflectivity and so on and I won't get
too much into it but if we select
illumination for example I've got this
image here now usually a model where you
have some glowing Parts comes with one
of these but let's say we increase the
contrast and up the brightness a
bit so I've just got this black and
white grid here and I'm going to hit
okay keep in mind I have it under my
illumination tab so if I go down here I
can change the color to something like
green and let's start increasing the
intensity so now we have this glowing
green color driven by this illumination
image so again this sometimes comes with
the 3D model where you have some glowing
pieces but this is how you can control
it using these settings now just one
more thing here is if we zoom in you can
see that the texture is not perfect and
that is because it's a simple cube
without any UV data so once I select my
box here we'll go down into UV mapping
and if we change this to box for example
you can see it sort of aligns it to look
a bit better again it's not perfect
because it's not UV mapped but this is
something I often use on flat surfaces
such as a floor or a box like this one
and I can even create duplicates so I'll
set this to five and five and now I got
more of the texture displayed on this 3D
model so that's the basics of texturing
in element 3D Ox channels are something
very important for animating certain
objects and it becomes really useful
once you understand how to use it so you
remember how we split the flow layer for
example in a different group so I set it
under group number two here and then we
can animate the floor and the object
individually later on now what if we
want to animate a certain part of the
model let's say this fan right here so
we can use auxiliary channels or Ox
channels to do so for example if we go
into the texture here we've got these
two icons which basically switch from
the material to the mesh view so here
you can see the individual pieces of
this model so for example this last one
here is our fan now how do we animate it
to spin without animating the whole
group so what we do here is we select
this mesh we right click it go to
auxiliary animation and select channel
one now we're going to hit
okay and let me just move the camera
here so we can see the
fan now if we go into group one Ox
channels channel one since it's the
channel we set it to we can animate this
object individually so if we go into the
rotation let's set a key frame for the
yeah for the Y AIS here if you can see
it I will expand it here so the Y
rotation let's set a key frame here go
to 2 second long and give it about two
Evolutions so once we play this back we
have the fan individually spinning and
anything we set under channel one will
basically follow these settings so we
can do this with multiple channels for
example if we have a car we can set each
wheel to be under a different group if
we want to and then we can sort of
animate them rotating in different
directions so auxiliary channels are
something very useful when animating
individual pieces of a bigger model all
right let's move on to the animation
engine which is probably the most
powerful option within this tool I use
this all the time and it can create some
really really cool animations and it's
quite simple so I've got my bul fracture
here from the starter pack let me just
scale it up a bit and I will duplicate
my group folder here and I'll set it to
number two let's give it a different
texture on my second group here so I'll
just give this a gold color and this one
will be black let's hit okay I'm going
to move group one here to the left then
I'll go into particle look multiobject
and make sure I enable it again we went
through this before it basically
animates each piece
individually and what I'm going to do
here is scroll down to group
utilities and I can copy and paste my
group one onto group two so we'll go
here and paste it and what that does is
basically paste the exact same settings
from group one onto group two so if we
go into group two here you can see that
the multiobject is enabled since we
copied it from group one let me just go
ahead and move group two to the right
here and we can now scroll down to
animation engine and enable it let's go
to the very first frame and set a key
frame from 0 to 100 on my animation so
what's going to happen is the first
group is going to transition to the
second group since it's the same 3D
model with the exact same amount of
pieces but the texture is transitioning
here Midway we can also go down into the
directional options here and change the
Yao here to 180 so we have it going in
the right direction so it goes from
right here transitions to right here and
this just fits our perspective a bit
better so we have two text layers for
example and if we try to transition
between one and two you can see that
it's not as smooth as the previous
animation because it is two completely
different 3D models so this works great
when the model is exactly the same you
can use different textures but only with
the same 3D model but you still can
create cool text animations using this
animation engine the way I do this is if
I take my first text layer let me
duplicate it into group number two here
so I just have two similar groups here
let me go ahead and Center it
here and again I'm just going to copy
and paste it into group
two let me disable the animation engine
so I can actually see it and I can
animate this
randomly I can maybe animate the
rotation as well
and just drag this back here maybe below
a bit and so on now let's enable the
animation engine we'll change this to
group two and group one and now we've
got the text animated from one position
to another there's also something called
animation type here so for example I've
got this floor fracture let me drop the
second model up top here and I'll
scramble the rotation here maybe
displace it like so if if we move here
you can see the second
group and let's enable the animation
engine start group one finish group two
so it's basically animating from group
one into group two and now it will go
from the center because I have the set
to radial I can also reverse this by
setting the radial option from outward
to inward so now it's going from the
sides of this model onto the center so
again a very powerful animation tool and
I use this quite a bit so we do have
something called utilities right here
and I don't really use this too often
but it's still a great tool if you want
to position something in your 3D scene
so for example I have my text here let
me turn it into 3D and let's say I want
to place it on top of this box here to
be in the correct position in 3D space
so let me just rotate it 90° and I don't
know try to kind of position this and
now if we move around it's not really on
top so it's giv me trouble and I want to
put it right here so this is where
utilities come in handy so what we can
do is select a 2d point now anywhere we
select on our 3D scene it's going to
basically create a 3D null so if I click
on top here and select generate null we
have a 3D null here with a position so
if we copy this position onto this text
now it basically placed it right on top
of this box here so you can see it's
quite aligned in 3D space so if you're
trying to add some stok footage or
anything to your 3D scene this is a
great way to find the right spot for it
in your scene okay now the most
important part to have your scene look
incredible is render settings and I'm
not talking about render quality or
something like that but here is
basically where you control the Shadows
light and so on so what do we have here
physical environment is basically the
environment map we've talked to about
previously we can enable it in the
background so if you want to render some
360 or anything with the background
behind it you can enable that and you
got some basic color correction options
right here and how it reacts to your
scene so I often use this to maybe
rotate my environment so usually I would
hide it then I would set a key frame on
one of the rotations here so then
instead of having a still frame I've got
this sort of like a image going around
around it and it's reflecting it and you
can obviously change this like I've
shown you before and it a pretty useful
tool next on we got lighting now this is
not the lights from the comp as you can
see you have an option to use comp
lights or not but this is rather a
preset light where you can have some
different colors and very cool
variations which you commonly see in
different type of renders and you can
also control the rotation of it and the
strength of it like so now you usually I
do use this light and both the AE light
so I would create a new Light Element
accepts all kinds of lights but I
usually work with parallel spot and very
rarely with a point light where I just
need to fill in some dark spots so I'll
choose the parallel light let's keep the
intensity 50 and cast Shadow set to on
now we'll hit position here and just
move the light on top bring it back a
bit and using this Anchor Point we can
can control where the light is going to
so let's say we just place it right here
and here you can enable and disable the
light if you want to so again I do use
both of these to create all sorts of
interesting looks and I do recommend
playing around with the rotation
settings here as well let's move on to
the Shadows which is the most important
part when selling your scene in certain
shots usually track shots and so on so
we'll go into the Shadows here and
enable it now if we look back here this
is where our light is coming from so
it's going from there to behind we can
control it using this Anchor Point of
our light and also move it in position
to adjust our shadows as needed we can
also go into the light settings here to
adjust the
darkness and under element Shadow
settings we can either increase the
shadow size in case we got bigger scenes
or blur the radius if we need to soften
up the Shadows right here so let's let's
keep this on and move forward here
subsurface cing is something I don't
really use with element it is basically
the same effect you would get on your
skin if light shines through this I
never really got to it so I'm going to
skip this one for now now ambient
occlusion is similar to Shadows but I
will say this is the most important
setting to turn on because it basically
enables Shadows between objects so I can
increase the intensity here and
basically we get this contact Shadow
between different objects in our scene
and it obviously helps it look much much
more realistic and sell the shot so
these are one of the settings I always
turn on no matter what I'm rendering
even if it's just a text image then
we'll have a shadow between the letters
and it's important to sell the shot so
again very useful M Shadow and
reflection we'll get into in just a bit
fog is pretty self-explanatory it's
basically fog so if you have a scene in
the sky for example or even a dark like
this one let's enable the fog here and
I'll change the type to exponential
let's increase the brightness and now we
can sort of cut our plane here using
this black solid we can change the color
as needed so again if you're working in
the sky or something then you want to
add a slight Hue on your object so it
matches the scene a bit better and this
is one of the options that will help you
achieve this kind of look so let's
disable this for now and move on on to
motion blur pretty self-explanatory if
we have some sort of Animation so let me
just create two key frames here
obviously to smooth things out motion
blur is always a good option so let's go
and enable it here so once we play this
back we do have some motion blur with
our camera movement and the scene as
well this is a setting I turn on usually
after I'm finished with the scene so
just like a final touch depa field is a
great tool for creating close-ups so
usually what I would do is set to focus
indicator now if I go to my camera here
hit AA let me just get a bit closer
here and enable depto field basically
whatever is highlighted in red is what's
going to be in focus and the rest is
going to be blurred out so if we go back
into element here we'll set the mode to
pixel
blur you can see that it's focusing only
around this area and we can control the
amount of blur under our camera settings
right here so we've got the
aperture and we've got the blur level
depending on how close to the subject
you are you are going to adjust the
settings you can also key frame them if
the camera is moving so this is the best
option for creating realistic close-ups
moving on to Glow we did talk about
illumination Maps before where we
created the glowing grid and this model
also has has the light texture here
which is basically this text and it sort
of has this glow now if we enable the
glow under the render
settings we'll see only this area glow
up like I've mentioned before because it
has illumination Channel data so we can
increase the intensity and play around
with the glow settings I will show you a
technique I like to use instead of this
glow setting but this is also available
if you need it now Ray Tracer is
something I don't think I ever used but
basically you can enable your shadows to
be Ray traced instead of Shadow mapping
so for example I'll set it to R trist
here my ambient inclusion will also be
set to R trist and this is great for
let's say if you have a transparent
object so let me bring up a cube
here I'll scale it up here and I'm just
going to make it a transparent object so
I'll go into the texture settings here
and we've got something called for
opacity let's set this to maybe 20 so we
can sort of see through
it now we don't see any Shadows within
Inside the Box we only see it around
here and we've also get the ambient
occlusion so where R Tracer comes in
handy is if we set this to translucent
we are going to start receiving some
Shadows within transparent objects so
this is an option very specific if you
want to sort of reveal something inside
a bottle or something similar to that so
there it is again I never really used it
but it's there if you need it so camera
cut off is usually a problem solving
thing where you don't really use it I do
have a tutorial using it to animate an
object but what it does is basically
cuts off the plane far or near the
camera so what I mean is if we zoom out
here
enough okay right about here you can see
that there is a plane that starts to
sort of cut away from our scene so if we
increase and decrease the far plane here
we can identify how far we want it to
basically
render now the near plane is basically
the same thing but it's what's closer to
the camera so here I'm starting to get
this cutting off so I can increase this
to something like five or rather
decrease it and that is going to fix my
issue met Shadow or met reflection is
basically a way to only have an object
display the Shadows or the reflections
on the scene
what I mean by that is if we go into the
scene
setup and under our ground plane here we
can go into this reflect icon and set
the mode to be a mirror surface so
basically it acts like a mirror and it's
reflecting our text and we can also set
this to spherical if we got some ball
here and you just want it to reflect the
environment around but let's go with
mirror surface for now and I'll just
show you this in a scene here so it just
acts as a reflection following along
nicely and everything is great we can
also control the glossiness settings as
we mentioned before how reflective and
how glossy we want it to be but mat
shadows and Reflections is basically if
we scroll all the way down here we've
got these two options here if we enable
mat reflection our floor plane will only
display the reflection and if we enable
mat Shadow as well we'll see the Shadows
on it as well now we don't see it in
this interface but once we hit on okay
you can see that we we only see the
Shadow and the reflection on our scene
so usually on logos and text animations
if I just want a solid background I
would use a med Shadow or even when you
have a shot where you just want Shadows
enabled without the floor plane being
visible and finally we've got output
where we see each pass of our scene so
for example we can change this to Ambi
occlusion and we can only see the amb
occlusion we can do illumination and we
will only see the glowing parts and so
on and I commonly use it for compositing
so as we've mentioned before we do have
this glowing setting which we can enable
and it will make the glowing Parts glow
now it's a great feature but I do want
to use deep glow for more realistic glow
for example I can duplicate my element
3D layer and on this layer I'm going to
isolate the illumination Tab and now
I've got my Illumination in a separate
3D layer so if I add a deep glow for
example and this is a different plugin
but just as an example
I can add my glow here let me set to
screen and I basically got a layer only
controlling the glow and I can use a
different type of glow or any type of
effect so another way you can use this
is for depth of field so if you don't
want to mess with the camera depth field
for example let's duplicate the layer
one more time and I'll change the
composite to Z depth and now we can
control the depth of our scene and
basically Define what's going to be in
focus and what's going to be blurred out
so if I create a new adjustment
layer let's hide this and we'll add
camera lens blur to
this and I'll set my blur layer to be
the second element layer make sure I
enable effects and mask then if I
increase the blur here so we can control
the depth of field using this layer as
well instead of just using the camera
another great feature is specular for
example what I usually do is add a
levels effect and I basically isolate
whatever is bright in our scene then I
can add a glow to
it and I'll set the layer to screen and
then I have this nice looking glare on
my glowing parts of my scene so another
great use for the outputs now one more
thing here it is very important is the
multi- simpling and super sampling this
is commonly used when you experience a
lot of flickering I do have a short up
about this so basically if your scene
has a lot of flickering due to
Reflections and so on what you want to
do is set your multi sampling to 16 and
the super sampling I'll usually bump it
to two sometimes to four now obviously
we do have the polar ground mode here
set to wireframe if you want to see the
wireframe and also Point Cloud just like
a cool little pass you can render not
sure if you can see this but it is there
if you want to and finally we do have
this render mode which is basically
something you can make your scene run a
bit smoother if you're just animating or
just want to preview something and it
gets heavy you can change this to a
draft or preview just so it lowers down
the settings and you can get a faster
preview so we went over most of the
features that element 3D has to offer
hopefully I did not forget any important
details but nonetheless I hope you found
this overview useful and can now get
started on some exciting new projects I
do have some tutorials already available
on the channel for specific effects
where where I use most of the features
we went over here and I do plan on
making more I never made this kind of
video before so once again I hope it was
useful thank you for watching and I'll
see you in the next tutorials